yo what up I've got a little bit more of
a healthy pink glow in my face in this
video if you've been watching my videos
regularly you know that I've been
recovering from extreme jet lag since
going from the west coast of Canada to
the middle of Germany and I've been
trying to cope with that jet lag but
going to the gym a lot but also came
down with a really nasty cold flu type
of virus and today is maybe the first
day that I've recovered from that so
nice to see you again YouTube um respond
to a few things that Palestinian said
about mental illness and mental health
as Francis Bacon said it's always better
to begin with concrete examples of these
things and only later to move on to
general statements of theory or
principle so to get to the heart of it I
used to live in a charming country
called Cambodia in Cambodia right up to
the 20th century and including the wars
Cambodia still infamous for worse the
1960s 1970s and so on warriors would
kill their enemies cut open their
abdomens and bite into some of their
organs I forget now if it was the liver
or the kidneys but it was one specific
organ that gushes hot blood when you
take it out of your enemy's body and
this was considered not only normal but
some virtuous good in this culture is
that insane there were journalists and
war correspondents who witnessed this of
read accounts and you were horrified at
the barbarity of it and they couldn't
believe whatever the year was that's
what this is nineteen sixty-five or what
everything were there and these people
are still doing this thing that seems
like it comes out of the pages of a
history book from I don't know thousands
of years ago and this type of intense
warrior culture along with what you
could call a death ritual or a blood a
blood ritual I don't know what you want
to call it this existed alongside and in
the context of Orthodox tera vaada put
this recently in conversation the
professor actually pointed this out that
while i have many critiques of buddhism
very often these cultures what buddhism
competed with the other religious views
that exist alongside it were so bleak
and so terrible involving human
sacrifice animal sacrifice and other
rituals that inevitably you sympathize
more and more buddhism as some kind of
civilizing force at least as a force
that's directing people to minimize the
amount of violence that intelligent as
Marcus Aurelius says the question is are
we to be sane or insane in Cambodia
right up to the 20th century at least
until the 1940s probably later in some
areas they had gladiatorial games they
had men with men who didn't disagree
with each other many didn't hate each
other fight to the death just for public
entertainment this is often kind of
glossed over or avoided when people give
very flattering histories of what we
know called kickboxing muy Thai and so
on that actually these were blood sports
that were fought for the ultimate prize
that were fought for a life and death
and for no particular reason it was
applauded and people enjoyed it as a
public spectacle and son a problem with
it seems insane but these were
widespread publicly sanctioned socially
sanctioned forms of insanity I've read
accounts again from the 20th century you
know fully a hundred years ago or a
little bit more than her years ago now
from Mongolia a very different culture
but again a culture where Buddhism is a
dominant influence where you know men
are applauded for behavior that we would
consider insane that would you know
definitely land them in a mental
hospital even if they were serving in
the in the US military today but again
despite the Buddhists the ostentatiously
Buddhist culture of Mongolia out in that
part of Asia with the wars that were
unfolding there was also a warrior sub
culture and various forms I don't know
what we might call blatant insanity were
held up as virtues as things to be
imitated so to some extent what we
perceive to be seen and what we perceive
to be insane is socially conditioned and
in some ways you know the modern Western
capitalist world is hyper conformist
anyone who can't conform to the demands
of their workplace is very rapidly
perceived to be insane if you work in an
office anyone who can't every day from
nine to five keep up with the
expectations that are imposed on them
comes to be perceived as insane very
quickly that's true in many different
workplaces across the board there are
very few walks of life where there's any
latitude or lassitude for someone to be
a little bit offbeat a little bit
eccentric without being branded xane and
of course the exceptions are celebrated
in film and television and fiction yes
if you work in the arts if you're a
sculptor or a painter then you may get
away with some eccentric behavior but
other than that for the vast majority of
us anything that takes a step to the
left of the right out of what's expected
you what's the matter view is pretty
soon regarded as insanity now PO Simeon
brings a particular lens to this issue
he's speaking in a way that tries to
motivate people and uplift people and he
says that from his perspective mental
health problems are electable there
something you can get out of there
something that in the moment you have
control over now in terms of what is
socially perceived as insanity I'm sure
he has found that to be true in many
instances in his life because we
perceive so many things as insane that
are not really insane
but if you read much pilloried works
like the DSM the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual every sophisticated
intellectual is a familiar with the
critiques attacking and denouncing this
foundational work of modern bio
psychiatry but nevertheless when you
read those descriptions one of the
mention to two of the hard criteria that
would hear dispute or controvert or
cause a problem for Palestinians
optimistic assessment of mental health
problems two criteria are very simply
worded as compulsion and interruption if
look you may have never in your life
observed truly compulsive behavior but a
compulsive behavior whether it's in a
person who is sane or insane is by
definition something they cannot stop
themselves from doing even if they are
aware of it so you can have compulsive
behavior that a person is not aware of
but then even if you observing the
person doing it try to stop them and
speak to them make them aware of what
they're doing they still can't stop
doing it even if they've been through
therapy and discussed it even if they've
reflected on even if they've written a
journal about it even if they've
published a book about it compulsive
behavior by definition is what they
can't stop themselves are doing and
depending on what walk of life you're in
you may go through your whole life
without really observing this phenomenon
within human nature but truly compulsive
behavior absolutely by definition and I
have seen it that is something that is
outside of the remit of postilions
optimistic statement that you can
liberate yourself in the moment you can
change your character you can change
your direction you could overcome the
ties that bind you to
mental health problems interruption in
the strict sense that you find it in the
DSM and other psychiatric literature I
suppose interruption is a really
interesting and useful criterion to
point out when you talk about for
example alcoholism the meaning of love
let's use cigarette addiction you can
observe someone who is trying to quit
smoking who's intensely addicted to
nicotine and they've just started trying
to quit smoking and while driving a car
with no cigarettes they come to a point
where they absolutely cannot continue
driving the car because of their they
are experiencing interruption as a
symptom of nicotine withdrawal okay many
other forms of drug addiction likewise
have very clear for interruption now how
they deal with that interruption may be
many things they might get out of the
car and go buy a pack of cigarettes but
even if you stop them and tie them up in
a straitjacket they are going to go
through a period where they cannot
return to that normal function they
can't drive the car they can't just
ignore it and keep doing what they're
doing so this is actually a really
interesting criterion because some
things that we refer to as addiction
people do not experience interruption in
withdrawal symptoms for so you know
people talk about today pornography
addiction but do you ever have a
scenario where someone is driving their
car and they suddenly can't continue to
drive the car anymore because they need
to have access to pornography I believe
the answer is no maybe I'm wrong maybe
someone's doing a scientific study right
now and saying no there really are these
forms of withdrawal comparable to a a
chemical addiction now not all fours
chemical addiction have interruption as
an aspect but interruption I mean it's
very obvious you know one I remember
reading a detailed study of
arachnophobia a very simple form of
mental disorder in many ways and sort of
compared to other things but you know
you have someone I remember one of her
symptoms was she absolutely could not
get into her car because of the fear
that there were spiders in the darkness
hiding inside the car the only way she
would enter her own car was if she first
sprayed it with insecticide and waited
for the choking cloud of insecticide to
throw out of the car and what was it in
that case when her husband tried to
force her you know froze me just hustled
her into the car put her into the car
without spraying it with insecticide she
expects treem interruption and she
actually kicked through the glass window
because she was so terrified okay so
compulsive behavior is one thing
interruption is another I don't know if
I ever had the kind of optimism that
Palestinian expresses here that you can
overcome your mental health problems in
the way he describes in a sense I wish I
did I wish I had that optimism under the
DSM the grouping of what are called
personality disorders if you have met
and spent time with people who truly
have personality disorders then you're
often looking at a lot of compulsive
behavior and you may be talking some
ways otherwise highly rational or highly
reflective not everyone but some of them
are they may be able to articulate what
their mental health problems are and yet
they remain powerless over those
compulsive behaviors and you can take if
you're not a professional if you're not
a psychiatrist or psychotherapy so you
can take any attitude you want to take
towards it you can be sympathetic or you
cannot be sympathetic you can be
contemptuous you're on a case-by-case
basis whether or not you feel any
empathy for the person who's going
through this is up to
you but I think that that empirical
experience is spending time with people
like that people with personality
disorders as an example would really
convince anyone that no you can meet
human beings who who definitely are
powerless over things they have
knowledge of they have understanding of
even when they exhibit maybe tremendous
self-discipline introspection in other
aspects of their life so the one sense
in which I want to agree with pal Simeon
is that a normal everyday life you do
meet people who exhibit behaviors that
are considered insane that socially
qualify as being insane in an informal
sense but in fact these behaviors are
strategies there's strategies in the
sense that their behaviors people elect
to engage in for a given objective even
if they have been engaging in them for
so many years that they have come to
appear compulsive that they've come to
appear to be any meat part of their own
character it's very common even amongst
teenagers you can meet people who've
engaged in certain types behavior
because it got their parents approval
because it got the attention the
opposite sex because it got them
attention period and maybe they engaged
in these behaviors these mannerisms when
they were six years old and they were
still engaging in them at 16 but when
you get a little bit older than that
those behaviors start to not just seem
childish they start to seem insane
that's quite common and it's both
deceptive to perceive those things as an
innate part of the person's character
and I think it's all so deceptive to
think of them as true compulsions and
very often in my own life I've people
have been close to me and not even that
close to me sometimes really engaged
with philosophical discussions of people
or by the end of the discussion they
realize that something they're doing
something they're saying even a
political ideology there a spell
really is a kind of unexamined strategy
they've been engaged in for so many
years that they lost their grip on the
edges of it they've forgotten why they
were engaging in or what the objectives
were and maybe they'd forgotten really
how inappropriate it was to engage in
that behavior in some circumstances and
contrast others um I admit I was
thinking about this recently for totally
different reasons for the ones
Palestinian raises or engagement um it
is said for me to see so many people
with small political differences
perceiving each of each other as insane
and those political differences although
they may be small may be totally
impossible to navigate in the United
States people who support abortion
almost never eat lunch with people who
oppose abortion it's what we call a
watershed issue in politics when I was
in Taiwan people who support Taiwanese
independence never eat lunch with people
who support Taiwanese reunification
whether you think of these as issues as
being left wing versus right when
normally in any given culture living in
there are hard and fast criteria people
apply to politics and they never talk to
anyone on the other side or often they
jump the conclusion that anyone who
disagrees on this particular issue that
matters so much them anyone disagrees
he's insane that's sad for me to see and
I see it even with my own professors one
of my professors has an extreme view on
immigration politics and that Professor
will she definitely won't eat lunch with
you she will basically dismiss you as
insane if you disagree with her even
though really at least ninety eight
percent of the people of Canada
would not agree with review i think it's
above 99 percent and I've seen polling
data and we do have polls about what
people's opinions are on immigration law
and and what have you so even though
she's in a tiny minority on that
political issue she regards anyone who
disagrees there as insane I have also
spoken to feminists who are extremely
opposed to pornography and they they
think that anyone who tolerates
pornography isn't saying simply anyone
who doesn't share their extreme view
that it should be illegal and
exterminated doesn't even mean you have
to like it but anyone who even tolerates
they would never eat lunch with would
never socialize with the crime scene um
so that comes back to my earlier point
of the extent to which perceptions of
sanity insanity as Marcus Aurelius says
the question of whether we are to be
seen or insane the fundamental
philosophical question it becomes an
invidious game and people tend to lose
sight of the extent to which their
categorization of others is socially
conditioned whether that social
condition because they grew up in
Cambodia or maybe it's socially
conditioned because in the last ten
years the only people you've been
talking to you or other feminists who
agree with you or other people who are a
member of your particular political
faction people who agree with your
political opinions on some obscure issue
that's it that's an ugly side of human
nature um but at the same time I've had
enough experience in politics I have
seen insane behavior behavior that
really looks insane compulsive extreme
behavior exhibited by people but I can
tell it is not truly compulsive behavior
it is something they're doing as a
strategy even if it's become a second
ational units become so familiar to them
and the way out of that
if they can become aware of it if they
can become aware of their own motives it
is electable simply by questioning the
reasons why they're doing what they're
doing human nature is flexible
frightening ly flexible Eva and you know
the same people who in Cambodia would go
to watch two men kill each other in a
public battle to the death on another
day of the week that would go to a
Buddhist monastery and meditate and
chanta sutra about how you shouldn't
even kill a mosquito and you should live
a life of complete non file human nature
is malleable and that is probably what
makes us so uncomfortable when we're
confronted with the reality of
personality disorders in compulsive
behavior because that is exactly an
exhibition of an aspect of human nature
that is not valuable that people are
powerless over that refuses to change
and that refuses to be changed even when
the person is aware of it even when
they're sincerely trying to improve